---
title: Music of the Month - Feb 2022
date: 2022-03-03
description: Music I enjoyed this past month
---

# Music of the Month - Feb 2022

February was a weird month for me. I tested positive for Covid, and it just
knocked me out for a couple of weeks. I was amazed at how long I stayed sick. I
wasn't able to do a whole lot, and staring at my computer wasn't really an
option, so I spent a lot of time listening to new music, and listening intently
without doing anything else. I always find this the best way to truly experience
an album: sit down, put on some headphones, and listen through the entire album.

## Album of the Month

My album of the month for February is _Love_ by Amen Dunes. I've only briefly
listened to Amen Dunes in the past, never his full albums. The only song of his
that I would have recognized was _Song of the Siren_, but I randomly came across
the song _Love_ which lead me to the album which I immediately listened to in
its entirety. This album brings you on a journey through joy, grief, heartbreak,
and solace. It's a great album to listen to when you don't feel well and just
want to immerse yourself in some low frills authentic good music. Fun fact, some
of the members from Godspeed You! Black Emperor, one of my favorites, played on
this album. If you know GY!BE you'll understand why this is notable seeing how
radically different this albums is than anything they've put out. This is a
fantastic album.

<iframe style="border: 0; max-width: 350px; height: 786px;" src="https://bandcamp.com/EmbeddedPlayer/album=268674417/size=large/bgcol=333333/linkcol=ffffff/transparent=true/" seamless><a href="https://amendunes.bandcamp.com/album/love">Love by Amen Dunes</a></iframe>

## Song of the Month

I listened to a lot of jazz this month. If it wasn't for the album above, the
album this next song came off of could have also easily been the album of the
month for me. The song of the month for me this month was _Glad to be Unhappy_
by Paul Desmond. Such a smooth chill song. If you're unfamiliar with Paul
Desmond this entire album, also named _Glad to be Unhappy_, is a great
introduction.

<iframe max-width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/l9ckU_FLQR4" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

_See you next month_
