---
title: Lately - 02
date:  2023-03-04
description: What I've been up to lately.
---

# Lately

A lot of this past month was prepping for this next month. March will be a pretty
busy month for me with traveling for work and a lot of events happening.
Sometimes months like this are difficult for me since you look back at the work
you've done and feel like you didn't accomplish much, until all that prep-work
flourishes in the future.

## Working at the Scala Center

As many of you may know, [work](https://lunatech.com) has lent me out to the
[Scala Center](https://scala.epfl.ch/) and this last month was a lot of
maintenance work around the ecosystem. The more I work in Scala tooling the more
I recognize just _how small_ that community of people are. The amount of work
that the Scala Center gets done in pure maintenance alone across a handful of
tools is miraculous.

Apart from maintenance work a large chunk of my time has been spent in
preparation for a Scala Tooling Summit that will be happening in March. I look
forward to give an update afterwards, but around 30 people from important tools
in the ecosystem, the compiler team, and community contributors are all coming
together to discuss the state of tooling, look at collective problems, and
attempt to cement a clear roadmap moving forward focused on de-duplication of
efforts between teams, unified approaches, and stabilisation. This has been an
ongoing effort behind the scenes for the past few months. I'm quite excited
about this, and expect to hear more after the meet.

## Hardware

In part it could be because I'm now working on tooling full-time during the day,
but also probably more attributed to a bit of burn out, but I've found myself
coding much less in my free time and instead looking into new interests, or
spending time re-exploring past ones. I don't have a traditional computer
science or engineering degree like many of my colleagues seem to have, so much
of the hardware / low-level things you'd explore in college I've never had the
opportunity to. Lately for me that has manifested in my exploring circuitry,
learning how to solder, and doing a few small projects. One project that I'm
excited about is a [Torn V3 build](https://github.com/rtitmuss/torn) that I've
started:

![torn v3 build layout](../images/torn-layout.jpeg)

You can follow my progress on this on [Mastodon](https://hachyderm.io/@ckipp/109937778576136195).

## Reading

Related to the above, I stumbled upon [_Code: The Hidden Language of Computer
Hardware and Software_](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/44882.Code) by
Charles Petzold, which is a fantastic overview of how code was born. Starting
with an wide overview of braille, logic gates, and binary calculators you build
you way up to a modern computer. It's a fascinating read that has been teaching
me a lot of things I've never dove into before. It's been a great supplement for
me as I've started diving into the hardware side of things to better understand
what I'm actually doing.

## Software

A crazy amount of my time is spent on my computer, especially in my terminal. So
my software choices in this area aren't made lightly, and I often don't switch.
However this past month has me exploring a few new pieces of software, a couple
which seem to be sticking.

[Arc](https://arc.net/) is one of the first browsers that I've tried that really
seem to challenge the way I use a browser. Challenging the way you use tabs,
shortcuts, and layout. At first it just seemed silly, but the more I've gotten
used to it and have been learning the shortcuts the more I'm convinced that
there's been barely any advancement in the way we use browsers since _almost_ as
long as I can remember. While I'm for sure not using Arc to its fullest I'm
enjoying slowing getting accustomed to it, and I will likely stick with it.

I've been a long-time [iTerm2](https://iterm2.com/) user. Even though I barely
use most of it's features, especially because I use
[tmux](https://github.com/tmux/tmux) as a terminal multiplexer, I've valued the
stability it offered and the ability to just display things the way I've wanted.
However [wezterm](https://wezfurlong.org/wezterm/) offers much of the same
stability, is super snappy, and is configured via Lua. I've recently made the
jump and I'll definitely be sticking with it as the easy configuration that can
be stored in my dots repo along with nice features like instant reloading are
just great.

## Listening

This month I stumbled on a _new to me_ band called [Hermanos
Gutiérrez](https://hermanosgutierrez.bandcamp.com/) that have been on repeat.
Such a chill vibe that's easy to listen to while working, relaxing, or
commuting.

<iframe style="border: 0; width: 100%; height: 120px;" src="https://bandcamp.com/EmbeddedPlayer/album=126397725/size=large/bgcol=333333/linkcol=ffffff/tracklist=false/artwork=small/transparent=true/" seamless><a href="https://hermanosgutierrez.bandcamp.com/album/el-bueno-y-el-malo">El Bueno Y El Malo by Hermanos Gutiérrez</a></iframe

They did an interesting [interview](https://youtu.be/wTC3i19hCS0) where they
spoke about some of their inspirations for their previous record and they listed
some other fantastic artists like Adrian Quesada. He did a remake of _El Muchacho
De Los Ojos Tristes_ with Tita that has also been on repat for me this month.

<iframe style="border: 0; width: 100%; height: 120px;" src="https://bandcamp.com/EmbeddedPlayer/album=35855793/size=large/bgcol=333333/linkcol=ffffff/tracklist=false/artwork=small/track=3648796777/transparent=true/" seamless><a href="https://adrianquesada.bandcamp.com/album/boleros-psicod-licos">Boleros Psicodélicos by Adrian Quesada</a></iframe>

## Watching

A movie I watched this past month that I really enjoyed was [Bullet
Train](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bullet_Train_(film)), which is a film
adaption of a [Japanese Book titled
マリアビートル](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bullet_Train_(novel)). Such an
easy film to watch, some dark humour, and sprinkled with ridiculousness. Can we
also take a second to appreciate the outfit Brad Pitt was wearing, which is one
I'd happily wear.

![Brad Pitt outfit](../images/bullet-train-brad-pitt.jpeg)
