---
title: Lately - 01
date: 2023-01-23
description: What I've been up to lately.
---

# Lately

I follow a few blogs that are in the habit of doing regular updates about what
they are up to on a regular basis. A great example of this is the _Recently_
posts by [Tom MacWright](https://macwright.com/). His blog is great by the way,
check it out. In this new year I wanted to get in the habit of writing more
frequently and sharing more of my interests than just programming. So you're
likely to see one of these each month. It's also fitting as I'm normally pretty
spread around with what I work on, so this allows me to simply share what I've
been up to without needing to really dive deep into a topic to write about. I
hope you enjoy.

## Scala Center

Recently [work](https://lunatech.com/) has lent me out to the [Scala
Center](https://scala.epfl.ch/) to do some work on tooling in the Scala
ecosystem. If you're not familiar, the Scala Center is a non-profit focused
on Scala education and maintenance of some of the core parts of the Scala
compiler and tooling ecosystem. Some of the first things I've dove into first
when joining have been [BSP](https://build-server-protocol.github.io/) related.

Firstly in an attempt to simplify the
[Bloop](https://scalacenter.github.io/bloop/) build, I started basically hacking
away and removing things. Bloop is a build server for Scala/Java that focuses on
speed. It's incredibly fast and has been pivotal to get Metals where it is now,
but also suffered from an equally incredibly confusing build. I was able to rip
out the Maven plugin, Gradle plugin, and the core config library into their own
repositories to be developed and versions standalone. Bloop also had a complex
meta-meta build that made contributing and getting started with Bloop difficult.
That's all now gone. If you're curious, you can find some of this work in the
following places:

- The [new home](https://github.com/scalacenter/bloop-config) of `bloop-config`
  and the [pr](https://github.com/scalacenter/bloop/pull/1868) removing it from
  Bloop.
- The [new home](https://github.com/scalacenter/bloop-maven-plugin) of the
  `bloop-maven-plugin` and the
  [pr](https://github.com/scalacenter/bloop/pull/1948) removing it from Bloop.
- The [new home](https://github.com/scalacenter/gradle-bloop) of the
  `gradle-bloop` plugin and the
  [pr](https://github.com/scalacenter/bloop/pull/1951) removing it.
- The [pr](https://github.com/scalacenter/bloop/pull/1956) re-working and
  removing the meta-meta build in Bloop.

Apart from working on Bloop my main focus has been looking into the default
choice in [Metals](https://scalameta.org/metals/), the Scala language server, to
use Bloop as your build server. This last year more and more users have started
defaulting to using the built-in BSP support in either
[sbt](https://www.scala-sbt.org/) or
[Mill](https://com-lihaoyi.github.io/mill/mill/Intro_to_Mill.html). Due to this
I've written up a report on the differences between the various build servers
[here](https://github.com/scalameta/metals/discussions/4505#discussioncomment-4571546)
that give a pretty good overview and a plan to move forward. I've also then been
working on small things related to this task in preparation to this move.

## Neovim

This last month I did a handful of small quality of life improvements and
updates to [nvim-metals](https://github.com/scalameta/nvim-metals) and have seen
a bunch of newcomers in the new year. Must be that learning Vim was a new years
resolution for a handful of Scala users!

More excitingly after a _long_ time of inactivity on the [Scala Treesitter
grammar](https://github.com/tree-sitter/tree-sitter-scala), a group of us from
the Scala Community were given maintainer access and started hammering out
improvements, especially to the Scala 3 grammar. Huge shout-out to
[Eugene](https://types.pl/@eed3si9n) and
[Anton](https://twitter.com/velvetbaldmime) for tackling the majority of the
Scala 3 improvements.

Just check out the difference in syntax highlighting before and after the last
month. Some of them are obvious, but some are more subtle. Overall, it's a huge
improvement.

_Before_

![tree-sitter-scala before](../images/ts-before.png)

_After_

![tree-sitter-scala after](../images/ts-after.png)

## This Site

Over the years this site has taken all sorts of forms. However, the focus has
always been on a minimal self-made site. I really enjoy making my own site from
scratch, and I enjoy looking at other sites that have done the same. I'll
probably do a whole post on this in the future when I feel a bit happier with
how everything is working together, but for now I'll outline a few changes:

- I migrated this site from using [Pandoc](https://pandoc.org/) via a bash
  script to a small [scala-cli](https://scala-cli.virtuslab.org/) project with
  Scala 3 using [flexmark](https://github.com/vsch/flexmark-java) to turn my
  markdown into html.
- I now have an RSS feed that you can follow [here](../rss.xml).
- I've started to create [lists](../lists) to better keep track of things that
  I'd like to return to. I've always sort of done this, but I'd like to start
  doing it in one place and making it public. For now they're each a yaml file
  which gets read up and then turned into html via
  [circe-yaml](https://github.com/circe/circe-yaml) and
  [Scalatags](https://github.com/com-lihaoyi/scalatags).
- Apart from syntax highlighting and [Pirsch analytics](https://pirsch.io/)
  there is no JS necessary for my site.

## Listening

Firstly, this year I'm doing a little experiment where I track all the new
albums that I listen to fully and enjoy. You can see my progress on this under
[/lists/albums](../lists/albums). This is an attempt to be a bit more attentive to the
new music I'm discovering and also a fun way to track my favorites of the year.
I'm excited to see what it looks like at the end of the year.

There's been two albums that have really stood out to me this month and have
been on repeat.

![portrait of a day](../images/albums/portrait-of-a-dog.jpeg)

[Jonah Yano's](https://jonahyano.bandcamp.com/album/portrait-of-a-dog) new album
_portrait of a dog_ is a funky smooth project done with
[BADBADNOTGOOD](https://tv.badbadnotgood.com/). I love the crisp minimal drum
lines, driving keys, and Jonah's magical voice. Often when listening I just get
lost in it, my eyes close, and I just enjoy it. The whole album is great.

![Gigi's Recovery](../images/albums/gigis-recovery.jpeg)

Funny enough, when I first started listening to this album I didn't really dig
it. It took me until I was around half way through, and then I fell in love.
_Gigi's Recovery_ by [The Murder
Capital](https://themurdercapital.bandcamp.com/album/gigis-recovery) is the
first album of theirs that I listened to, but I'll definitely be following them
in the future. I get some [Protomartyr](https://protomartyrband.com/) vibes from
them. They've got great lyrics, really catchy breaks, and throughout the album
they know when to go hard and when to just keep it simple. By far my two
favorites on the album are _The Lie Becomes the Self_ and _We Had to Disappear_.

## Reading

This last month I read [The Way of Life, According to Lao
Tzu](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/251651.The_Way_of_Life_According_to_Lao_Tzu).
It's been a book I've wanted to read for some time, and I felt like it was maybe
a good one to start the year off with. I read it slowly, just a few of the poems
per day. While I enjoyed t, the book wasn't as impactful as I was expecting
for some reason. I'll simply leave it as that.

I've also spent some time catching up on the articles of the sites I follow via
RSS. You can find a handful of them [here](../lists/sites). Another article I
often revisit that I did this month was the great article by Erin 'Folletto'
Casali, [The Impact of Toxic Influencers on
Communities](https://intenseminimalism.com/2020/the-impact-of-toxic-influencers-on-communities/).
If you're a part of the Scala community, I highly recommend the read in light of
recent events and personalities.

## Traveling

This month I spent a bit of time in Paris for work giving a talk called [What
I've learned in open source and why I think you should
contribute.](../slides/open-source). It was for a semi-regularly hackday that we have
at work where colleagues come together to give some talks, do workshops, and
just hack on things together.

![me in front of boot care](../images/paris-chris.png)

_Me in front of [Boot Cafe](https://www.instagram.com/bootcafe/).

![wall in paris with a face on it](../images/paris-wall.png)

_Just a wall in Le Marais._

![wall statue in the Rodin Museum](../images/paris-rodin.png)

_Statue on the wall in the [Rodin Museum](https://www.musee-rodin.fr/en)._
