---
title: Music of the Month - July 2022
date: 2022-07-31
description: Music I enjoyed this past month
---

# Music of the Month - July 2022

So I've finally stepped away from Jazz a bit this past month probably because it
was a bit hectic for me. Typically when it's hectic I find myself floating back
to more familiar records that bring familiarity and comfort.

## Album of the Month

During this past month I watched [Stranger
Things](https://www.imdb.com/title/tt4574334/) for the very first time, and
there are a handful of scenes that play [Jim
Croce](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jim_Croce). Growing up my Dad listened to a
ton of "oldies" so a lot of these artists from the 60s and 70s remind me of good
ol days on the farm where I grew up working with my Dad. Therefore, the album of
the month for me is the classic _You Don't Mess Around With Jim_.

<div style="max-width:100%;"><div style="position:relative;padding-bottom:calc(56.25% + 52px);height: 0;"><iframe style="position:absolute;top:0;left:0;" width="100%" height="100%" src="https://odesli.co/embed/?url=https%3A%2F%2Falbum.link%2Fi%2F1203475854&theme=dark" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen sandbox="allow-same-origin allow-scripts allow-presentation allow-popups allow-popups-to-escape-sandbox" allow="clipboard-read; clipboard-write"></iframe></div></div>


## Song of the Month

It's hard to explain [Godspeed You! Black
Emperor](https://brainwashed.com/godspeed/), GY!BE, to someone that's not familiar with
them. My "Music of the Month" series hasn't really shown it, but one of my
most-listened to genres is post-rock. Every since I discovered [Explosions in
the Sky](http://www.explosionsinthesky.com/) in high school, they genre has
meant a lot to me. GY!BE has some incredible albums. They're slow burners, so
some of them really take time to get into and maybe even more time to
appreciate. 20 minute songs are the norm. This month one that I've found myself
listening to over and over is Moya from the record _Slow Riot from New Zero
Kanada_. Again, if you've never listened to them before, take a seat, make sure
to listen to the whole thing, and enjoy.

<iframe style="border: 0; max-width: 350px; height: 470px;" src="https://bandcamp.com/EmbeddedPlayer/album=3803531554/size=large/bgcol=333333/linkcol=ffffff/tracklist=false/track=1587484362/transparent=true/" seamless><a href="https://godspeedyoublackemperor.bandcamp.com/album/slow-riot-for-new-zero-kanada">Slow Riot for New Zero Kanada by Godspeed You! Black Emperor</a></iframe>

_See you next month_
