---
title: Music of the Month - October 2022
date: 2022-11-06
description: Music I enjoyed this past month
---

# Music of the Month - October 2022

I missed September. I was on holiday for most of, was traveling quite a bit, and
then got sick. Life happens. On to October. This last month I was also all over
for music. Honestly no one album really dominated, so I decided to pick one of
my favorites that I recently got on vinyl. Enjoy this month.

## Album of the Month

There are few bands out there that have had more of an impact on me than [This
Will Destroy You](https://thiswilldestroyyoumusic.com/). I discovered them early
on in college and was just floored by the amount of emotion they put into their
music and the sheer energy you feel when listening to them. While this album
isn't my favorite of theirs it was one I listened to a lot this past month since
I ordered it a long time ago to my parents house, but haven't been back to the
States to retrieve it for years. Since this last month brought me back to the
US, I was finally able to bring it home with me. The album of the month this
month is [_New Others - Part
Two_](https://thiswilldestroyyou.bandcamp.com/album/new-others-part-two). It's
definitely an album you'll want to listen to in its entirety and ideally front
to back.

<iframe style="border: 0; max-width: 350px; height: 687px;" src="https://bandcamp.com/EmbeddedPlayer/album=1674374500/size=large/bgcol=333333/linkcol=ffffff/transparent=true/" seamless><a href="https://thiswilldestroyyou.bandcamp.com/album/new-others-part-two">New Others Part Two by This Will Destroy You</a></iframe>


## Song of the Month

This months "Song of the Month" came by surprise. I came across a song on my
weekly Spotify playlist that I really enjoyed. It went on to my seasonal
playlist (I make one every season and have been since 2015), and I found myself
playing it over an over. When I looked up the band, [Casino Versus
Japan](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Casino_Versus_Japan), I found out he's
located less than an hour away from where I grew up in Wisconsin. His song
_Marilyn Set Me Free_ is the "Song of the Month" for me this month. Super chill
song that sort of makes you feel as if you're floating and grooving all at the
same time. I want a full album of this vibe.

<iframe style="border: 0; max-width: 350px; height: 470px;" src="https://bandcamp.com/EmbeddedPlayer/album=3771486512/size=large/bgcol=333333/linkcol=ffffff/tracklist=false/track=461733032/transparent=true/" seamless><a href="https://attacknine.bandcamp.com/album/hitori-kaiso-1998-2001">Hitori + Kaiso: 1998 - 2001 by Casino Versus Japan</a></iframe>

_See you next month_
